---
title: "The Boys Were Too Genius This Time"
date: "2023-12-23"
description: "Listening to Boygenius' *The Record*"
tags: [music, reviews]
---

The first time I listened to Boygenius' *Cool About It* live performance on CBS, I was sitting outside in a corner of Columbia University, eating a lousy salad for lunch. *Cool About It* is a modest, quiet song, and I never really "got" it until I learned the finger-picking on my own guitar and sang it myself. There was something irresistibly touching about the CBS audience all belting out each word in this melancholy ballad the same way they would do to an upbeat rock anthem. Being mentally shaky is nothing particularly worth of celebration, but we might as well take the chance to celebrate how our fleeting and unfathomable emotions have now been put into words and melodies. We could take out what was breaking our heart, sing it at the top of our lungs, and listen to our own depression resound with that of thousands of others and blend with the sound of guitars and banjos into something bigger and more meaningful. Boygenius sounded like the confusion, loneliness, and freedom of a whole generation.

Rewind to one week earlier. It was my first day at NYC, and I was dragging my large suitcase across the bumpy pavement outside JFK airport. I finally found the driver who was waiting to pick me up, then proceeded to absent-mindedly cooperate with his small talk as we embarked on the long ride. Queen's bridge, Chinatown, then all the way to uptown Manhattan along the west edge of Central Park. Everything was new, and everything seemed to me like scenes from my version of the *True Blue* music video. The vibe was just right -- I wanted to feel alive, and hoped for NYC to help me with that. "When you don't know who you are, you f*** around and find out." I posted the lyric on social media before going to bed. The only missing piece was a someone for me to tell him or her, "you love is tough, you love is tried and true blue." But that was a minor problem. The chaos and entropy of the big apple was enough to flood into all space and time, sweeping away any crumbs of loneliness.

The three girls, or as fans jokingly call them, "the boys", each possess a deadpan sarcastic humor that is blended subtly into their music. It's often hard to tell whether a line in a song is dismally depressing or outright a joke. It might even make sense to say that most of the times it is both, since I have long felt that laughter hits the hardest when it is a reaction to pain. It is a way to cope, to self-efface and to dilute the weight of matters that may otherwise break you. I remember watching the stand-up comedy of Daniel Sloss, where he would describe how his family made jokes about his sister's early death, and how his female friend joked about her own experience of being raped. Some of the centers of humor in Boygenius' songs were issues nearly just as serious, but relating to their music on a personal level makes indulging in the humor come with less stings of guilt. In my defense, I'm laughing at myself, after all, not at anyone else.

Now it would be criminal not to talk about the sarcasm of the band name itself. "Boygenius" was designed to mock the fact that men in the music industry, especially in indie rock, could easily be recognized by their individual genius, while women were automatically classified into the box of "indie rock girls". Listeners and critics alike were too predisposed to take any pair of female artists to compare and contrast, as if music made by women belonged to a separate sub-category. This phenomenon being more pronounced in indie rock may be attributed to two reasons. The first is pure numbers -- rock is a male-dominated, or more specifically, white-male-dominated field. The second sadder reason is that qualities and actions that are conventionally "rock-and-roll" are rarely conventionally "feminine". Based on the backlash they received from angry men (and a smaller but sadly nonzero number of angry women), Phoebe Bridgers physically jamming her guitar into the speakers during her SNL performance of "I Know the End" was not ladylike; Lucy Dacus calling out Barack Obama as a "war criminal" on twitter (or should I say X) was not ladylike; Boygenius ripping open their shirts and leaving their boobs swinging around for all to see at the end of their London concert was certainly not ladylike. I feel like the three of them are simultaneously genre-defying and gender-defying. Their music sounds like a fractured kaleidescope that doesn't always embody the classic rock-and-roll sound, and their personalities are as "masculine" and they are "feminine". A very cliched disclaimer: I use quotation marks because traditional views of what masculine and feminine mean are socially constructed and prone to change. And when Boygenius redefines what it means to be females in the music scene, a group of women and girls who once felt like outcasts are able to find their niche.

There are so many tracks on this album that I want to call the song of my life. But above all, I want to appreciate how "It's a bad idea and I'm all about it" basically describes every fuck-up of my entire life. What about we drive the car straight into the valley and crash and burn? Thanks, guys.
